## Thoughts after reading the book Cicero by Anthony Everitt 
September, 2018

Before I read this book, Cicero’s name represented the figure of an ancient Roman orator and statesman who produced lasting works on politics and philosophy that profoundly influenced centuries of western thinkers. After I finished Everitt’s book, however, he was no longer just a distant figure, but had rather become a person, an actual person who had lived and fought for his ideals, and someone that I could sympathize with.

The one and most important question as I was reading this wonderfully written biography is whether Cicero truly believed that the Republic was still savable. The author seems to imply that Cicero’s tragic ending and his failure in saving the Republic and restoring the old political order lay in his misplaced optimism that the constitutional authority could be reestablished by reconciliation and moderate reforms, which was doomed to be a lost cause when the power was in the hands of mighty military commanders. I cannot help but wonder, nonetheless, did he really not sense the irreversible trend? Is it true that Cicero simply failed to see what Caesar saw and fought for a solution that would have never worked anyways? Or is it that he simply had his principles and moral values, and refused to give up? Knowing that one could hardly win, that the chances of victory is slight, and yet still sticking to and fighting for one’s belief, in my opinion, makes the person all the more honorable and heroic. Cicero, living in his times, did not have the luxury of hindsight as we do of historical inevitability, and for all his talents, did his best to restore Rome the Republic. 

As a civilian and not a general with distinguished military triumphs, as a new man and not an heir of an eminent patrician family, Cicero enjoyed unparallel political power and influence. He was perhaps most famous for his oratory skills, and he made sure that he took advantage of it to promote his political beliefs and push through his policies. However, he was much more than just a great, if not the greatest, orator. He possessed impressive administrative abilities, strategic thinking and planning skills, foresight, and unwavering faith and principles. He was not an opportunist or a follower in such chaotic and confusing times, but emerged a leader, and the spiritual symbol of the old Republican values and morals under dictatorship and in civil wars. Such personal charisma, and such steadfast loyalty and devotion to the Republic, are deeply moving. My tears went down at times.

That is not to say that Cicero should be deified and portrayed as a perfect Republican. Just like any other human being, he had his flaws. He was temperamental and emotional; he boasted his achievements during his consulship way too much; he was not as brave and talented on the battlefield as his contemporaries; he could not manage his personal finances well, etc. He had a dry sense of humor, and often made jokes at other people’s expenses. This trait probably got him more dislike or hatred than he would otherwise deserve, but to be honest at least I myself relished those jokes while reading the book, and I am sure many of his friends also enjoyed them, just as Caesar did. The author’s vivid depiction of the private person Cicero - his dry jokes and sour comments, his struggles and hesitation, his grief over his daughter’s death, his fondness of and friendships with smart young men - makes him someone that I can not only admire, but also relate to and sympathize with. 

History is the most fascinating subject in my opinion partly because it introduces so many questions that could never be answered. What would have happened if Cicero succeeded, which he almost did - would the Roman history be any different? What would have happened if such a talent as Cicero were born at a different time, say the times of the Roman Empire? What would have happened if the art of oration were passed down and we could witness the power and appeal of truly amazing public speaking skills such as his? 

As someone has brilliantly said, reading about history is the only way one can travel through time, and I am thankful to Everitt for such a great journey.
